# What is Git?

- Git is a popular version control system. It was created by Linus Torvalds in 2005, and has been maintained by Junio Hamano since then.
- It is used for:
  - Tracking code changes
  - Tracking who made changes
  - Coding collaboration

# What does Git do?

- Manage projects with Repositories
- Clone a project to work on a local copy
- Control and track changes with Staging and Committing
- Branch and Merge to allow for work on different parts and versions of a project
- Pull the latest version of the project to a local copy
- Push local updates to the main project

# Working with Git

- Initialize Git on a folder, making it a Repository
- Git now creates a hidden folder to keep track of changes in that folder
- When a file is changed, added or deleted, it is considered modified
- You select the modified files you want to Stage
- The Staged files are Committed, which prompts Git to store a permanent snapshot of the files
- Git allows you to see the full history of every commit.
- You can revert back to any previous commit.
- Git does not store a separate copy of every file in every commit, but keeps track of changes made in each commit!

## Git Install

You can download Git for free from the following website: https://www.git-scm.com/

## Configure Git

This is important for version control systems, as each Git commit uses this information:

```bash
Prita@hacker404 MINGW64 /d/DevOps (main)
$ git config --global user.name "Pritam Das"

Prita@hacker404 MINGW64 /d/DevOps (main)
$ git config --global user.email "er.pritamdas22@gmail.com"

Prita@hacker404 MINGW64 /d/DevOps (main)
$ git config --global user.name
Pritam Das

Prita@hacker404 MINGW64 /d/DevOps (main)
$ git config --global user.email
er.pritamdas22@gmail.com
```

## Creating Git Folder

```bash
Prita@hacker404 MINGW64 /d/DevOps (main)
$ mkdir Demo

Prita@hacker404 MINGW64 /d/DevOps (main)
$ ls
'00. BIN'/   '01. PYTHON'/  '05. GIT'/     Demo/       SYLLABI.xlsx
'00. SEPM'/  '02. LINUX'/    AUTOMATION/   README.md

Prita@hacker404 MINGW64 /d/DevOps (main)
$ cd Demo

Prita@hacker404 MINGW64 /d/DevOps/Demo (main)
$ pwd
/d/DevOps/Demo
```

## Initialize Git

Git now knows that it should watch the folder you initiated it on. Git creates a hidden folder to keep track of changes.

```bash
Prita@hacker404 MINGW64 /d/DevOps/Demo (main)
$ git init
Initialized empty Git repository in D:/DevOps/Demo/.git/

Prita@hacker404 MINGW64 /d/DevOps/Demo (master)
```

## How to clone Github Repo to your local repo

### 1. Get the Repository URL

- Go to the GitHub repository page you want to clone.
- Click on the green Code button.
- Copy the repository URL (either HTTPS, SSH, or GitHub CLI link).
- For example:

```
https://github.com/username/repo-name.git
```

### 2. Open Git Bash

- Open Git Bash on your local machine (or any terminal that supports Git).

### 3. Navigate to the Desired Local Directory

- Use the cd command to navigate to the folder where you want to clone the repository. For example, to move to your Projects folder:

```bash
cd /path/to/Projects
```

### 4. Run the git clone Command

- Use the git clone command followed by the URL of the GitHub repository.

```bash
git clone https://github.com/username/repo-name.git
```

- This command creates a copy of the repository in a new folder named after the repository.

### 5. Go to the Cloned Repository Directory

- After cloning, navigate to the new directory that was created:

```bash
cd repo-name
```

Now, the GitHub repository is cloned to your local machine, and you can start working with the files and Git features.

## GIT Process to Trak the files

### 1. Create a Hidden Git Folder

- If you have created any files or folders in your local machine, to track those files using git, you must have git hidden folder in your local repo, to get that use the command :

```bash
git init
```

### 2. Add Files to Stagging Enviornment

- Next there is something called as stagging enviornment in Git, when you have done work eith your files and folders, you should keep them in stagging enviornment, stagging files are those files which are ready to be committed, commited files are those files which git take tracking of it or does version controlling,
  to stage the files use this command:

```bash
git add filename.extension
```

- To add all the files into the stagging enviornment use this command:

```bash
git add -all
or
git add -A
```

### 3. Check the Status of Files

- To check the status of the files use this command:

```bash
git status
```

```
Note: Short status flags are:

?? - Untracked files
A - Files added to stage
M - Modified files
D - Deleted files
```

- We can also check the status of files using this command:

```bash
git status --short
```

### 4. Commit the files

- Adding commits keep track of our progress and changes as we work. Git considers each commit change point or "save point". It is a point in the project you can go back to if you find a bug, or want to make a change.
- When we commit we should use a message to commit, so that we can track of what commit we have done so far

```bash
git commit -m "Type down you message a s a first commit"
```

- We can also commit files without stagginbbg them

```bash
git commit -a -m "Type down you message a s a first commit"
```

### 5. View Commit History
- To view the commit History use this command
```bash
git log
```